.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Alexey Ayzin
.Dd June 16, 2026
.Dt TG 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tg
.Nd tag files with extended attributes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm add
.Ar tags
.Ar file ...
.Nm
.Cm rm
.Ar tags
.Ar file ...
.Nm
.Cm tags
.Ar file ...
.Nm
.Cm clear
.Ar file ...
.Nm
.Cm find
.Op Fl -any | Fl -all
.Op Fl 0
.Op Ar tags
.Op Ar path
.Nm
.Cm cp
.Ar src
.Ar dst
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
tags files using a POSIX extended attribute,
.Va user.tags ,
stored on the file itself rather than in a separate database.
Because the tags live in the file's metadata, they survive renames and moves,
and ride along on copies made with xattr-aware tools such as
.Xr cp 1
.Fl Fl preserve Ns = Ns Cm xattr ,
.Xr rsync 1
.Fl X ,
and
.Xr tar 1
.Fl Fl xattrs .
.Pp
A
.Ar tags
argument is a single comma-separated list, for example
.Ql work,urgent .
Tags are case-sensitive, may not contain a comma, and are trimmed of
surrounding whitespace.
The stored value is kept sorted and de-duplicated; see
.Xr tg 5 .
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm add Ar tags Ar file ...
Add each tag in
.Ar tags
to every
.Ar file .
Tags already present are left unchanged.
.It Cm rm Ar tags Ar file ...
Remove each tag in
.Ar tags
from every
.Ar file .
Removing the last tag deletes the attribute.
Tags that are not present are ignored.
.It Cm tags Ar file ...
Print each file's tags, one file per line, as
.Ql path\eta,b,c .
Untagged files print an empty list.
.It Cm clear Ar file ...
Remove all tags from every
.Ar file .
.It Cm find Oo Fl -any | Fl -all Oc Oo Fl 0 Oc Oo Ar tags Oc Oo Ar path Oc
List regular files under
.Ar path
(default:
.Ql \&. )
whose tags match
.Ar tags ,
one path per line.
With no
.Ar tags ,
list every tagged file.
.Bl -tag -width "--any"
.It Fl -all
Match files having every tag in
.Ar tags .
This is the default.
.It Fl -any
Match files having any tag in
.Ar tags .
.It Fl 0
Separate results with a NUL byte instead of a newline, for use with
.Xr xargs 1
.Fl 0 .
.El
.It Cm cp Ar src Ar dst
Copy the tag set from
.Ar src
onto
.Ar dst ,
replacing any tags on
.Ar dst .
If
.Ar src
has no tags,
.Ar dst Ns 's
tags are removed.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
Usage error (bad arguments).
.It 2
Runtime error (at least one file could not be read or written).
.El
.Pp
Per-file errors are reported on standard error and do not stop a batch
operation; the others in the batch are still processed.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Tag a file and read it back:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ tg add paper,ml notes.pdf
$ tg tags notes.pdf
notes.pdf	ml,paper
.Ed
.Pp
List everything under
.Pa ~/docs
tagged
.Ql ml
and delete it:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ tg find -0 ml ~/docs | xargs -0 rm
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getfattr 1 ,
.Xr setfattr 1 ,
.Xr xattr 7 ,
.Xr tg 5 ,
.Xr libtg 3
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Alexey Ayzin
