.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Alexey Ayzin
.Dd June 16, 2026
.Dt TG 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm user.tags
.Nd tag storage format used by tg
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr tg 1
stores a file's tags in a single POSIX extended attribute named
.Va user.tags ,
in the
.Va user
namespace, set on the file itself (symbolic links are not followed).
.Pp
The value is a list of tags joined by commas, for example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
user.tags = "ml,paper,to-read"
.Ed
.Pp
The canonical on-disk form obeys the following rules:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Tags are separated by a single comma
.Pq Ql \&, .
.It
Tags are sorted in ascending byte order and de-duplicated.
.It
A tag is non-empty, case-sensitive, and contains no comma.
Surrounding whitespace is not part of the tag.
.It
The value is not NUL-terminated and carries no trailing newline.
.It
A file with no tags has no
.Va user.tags
attribute at all; the empty value
.Ql \&""
is never written.
Removing the last tag deletes the attribute.
.El
.Pp
Readers should accept minor deviations produced by hand-editing, such as
extra whitespace around a tag or empty fields from a doubled or trailing
comma; such input is normalized on the next write.
.Sh INTEROPERABILITY
Because the format is plain text in a standard attribute, the tags can be
inspected or edited with ordinary tools:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ getfattr -n user.tags file
$ setfattr -x user.tags file	# remove all tags
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tg 1 ,
.Xr getfattr 1 ,
.Xr setfattr 1 ,
.Xr xattr 7
